---
layout:     post
title:      How to get a CS / Engineering job as a new grad
date:       2018-6-18 16:30:00
summary:
categories: technical
---

**Disclaimer: I am 22, and have limited perspective on job search strategies. I'll share here what worked for me, but this may not work for you.**

I graduated with a B.S. in Robotics Engineering less than a week ago with a ~3.3 GPA, from an engineering school that is nowhere near the top 10. While a large amount of my friends and classmates had difficulty finding employment, I was fortunate to have 6 job offers, ranging from a 5 person startup to Intel. I am writing this post as a guide to myself one year ago, as I have learned several strategies and best practices that I have not really seen discussed elsewhere.

*Summary: Do whatever it takes to get an internship before graduation. Develop side projects along the way. Do mock interviews until you're good at interviewing. Network and find a company you like. Generally, avoid applying online.*

# Step 1: Build a Resume
Unfortunately, simply getting a Bachelor's degree is no longer sufficient to impress employers. To stand out, I recommend two things:

## Get an internship
Do pretty much whatever it takes to land an internship. It's extremely helpful to develop your engineering skills, and looks good on a resume (for that reason). I found that I learned significantly more at my internships than I did in class. There's a lot already written on this, so I won't go too deep, but a few words of advice --

Don't apply online, pretty much as a rule. I've applied to hundreds of jobs / internships online, and I have friends who have done even more. In my experience / opinion, it is largely a waste of time if you're a fresh grad graduating from a mid level engineering school. My alma mater, UC Santa Cruz, is ranked #99 on usnews.com for Engineering (out of ~200 schools listed). As such, I have no idea what it's like going to MIT / Stanford -- it may be easier to get an internship. This post is targeted towards "not top 10" engineering school students.

Instead of applying online, network and cold email. Being a student is a superpower in this regard, because instead of sounding like someone who just wants a job, you can position yourself as wanting career or senior thesis advice. **Go on meetup.com and eventbrite.com, find all tech related events within ~1 hour of you, and attend them.** Meet everyone you can, get as many emails as you can, and then email them asking for advice. If the relationship progresses, mention that you're looking for a position, and see if they are able to help.

Cold emailing also works -- I got a great internship from this technique. Make a list of companies you're even vaguely interested in (this works if they're small, not so much with Google etc), and email them with a SHORT introduction and a targeted request for advice. "Do you have any career advice?" is bad. "What are your thoughts on [thing in their field] vs [other thing in their field]?" is better. Make it incredibly easy for them to respond to your email.

Now, when someone says "Sure, I'll let you intern at my company, but what can you do?", you need a good answer. This brings me to...

## Work on personal projects
Some of the classes in my undergraduate career nicely created GitHub repos and resume bullet points. Unfortunately, "some" means like 2. Unless your school is magical, you need to do side projects to stand out. Open source contributions are great here, but I could never really get into that. **I recommend Udacity.com, their courses are excellent for building portfolio pieces.**

Once you have personal projects done, you need a nice portfolio online. GitHub pages, Wordpress, Ghost (my personal favorite), blot.im -- pick one or Google "static site generator" and find one that you like. It's become very easy to put your work online. Get a nice domain name, start writing blog posts about whatever you're up to, and employers will be impressed.

# Step 2: Learn to Interview
Alright. You've maybe had an internship, and you've done some side projects outside of school. Your GitHub looks nice, and you have a personal website.

Unfortunately, this is pretty much meaningless if you can't interview well. CS / Engineering interviews generally involve whiteboard / laptop coding questions, so you need to get good at that. Coding and talking at the same time is a fairly artificial skill, but it is learnable.

First, buy Cracking the Coding Interview, and go through it. There's also a ton of coding prep websites out there, some of which are better than others. Leetcode and HackerRank are both good, but what I found was the most helpful was an actual interview environment with time pressure and another person. For that, I recommend interviewing.io, refdash.com, and pramp.com -- especially pramp.com. **I did about 20-30 interviews on pramp.com, and my interviewing skill went up immensely.** Obviously, make sure you're also good with CS fundamentals -- there's plenty of guides and roadmaps out there.

# Step 3: Start Interviewing
Now, similarly to getting an internship, start (or continue) networking. Go to career fairs and tech events, meet as many people as you can. Don't just ask for a job -- ask them about what they do, why they do it, how they got there, if they have any advice for you. If you live in an area without any good networking events, stick to cold emailing and LinkedIn messaging. You can apply online as well, but I've never had any luck with that strategy.

## How to interview
If it's a phone or online interview, pull up a big O cheatsheet and any other resources you might want to have handy. Have a notepad with questions you've prepared for the interviewer. During the interview, whenever a concept comes up that you don't know, write it down. Google it after the interview, and learn about it. Or, even better, ask the interviewer about it -- "no, I haven't heard of [concept], what's that?". Be curious, and after they explain it to you, respond in a way that lets them know you're listening -- "oh, so it's similar to [other concept] but with [specific difference]" (this backfires if you're wrong, so be careful).

Since you've already done plenty of mock interviews, you know where you tend to trip up. For example, I tend to zoom in too quickly when working on a problem, and forget about big picture system organization. Consider mentioning this to your interviewer beforehand -- "I've noticed I have a tendency to do [bad thing], and I'm working to correct that. If you see me doing this, I'd definitely appreciate feedback on it". Show that you're self aware, and looking to level up. In my experience, a good attitude and showing that you're motivated can make up for programming errors.

Similarly, when you're done with the interview and they ask "do you have any questions for me?", ask them for feedback. Several people have been clearly impressed when I asked this. "How could I improve my problem solving ability? Did you notice any places I could have done better?"

***

Hopefully this info is helpful -- I saw a huge uptick in job offers and interview positivity after I did a bunch of pramp.com interviews and revamped my resume / LinkedIn to focus on side projects.

This is by no means an exhaustive job prep guide, I mainly wrote this to fill in gaps from other pieces I've read over the past few years. There are a great deal of guides on how to write a good resume, how to create a portfolio site, how to solve coding problems, and more -- your favorite search engine should be able to provide them.

## Resources:
[Don't Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice](https://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/)

[A complete computer science study plan to become a software engineer.](https://github.com/jwasham/coding-interview-university)
