---
layout:     post
title:      Dotfile management in a 15 line Makefile
date:       2018-10-20 16:30:00
summary:
categories: technical
---

This article is targeted (as are most things I write) at a ~year younger me. I've been searching for a dotfile management system that really clicked with me for some time -- I've fussed with a variety of shell scripts and experimented around, spending no small amount of time on [dotfiles.github.io](http://dotfiles.github.io).

I've finally created a system using Make that I'm pretty happy with, and I'll walk through it in this article.
(If you want to skip to the punch line, the Makefile in question is [here](https://github.com/thedch/dotfiles/blob/master/Makefile))

## The Problem
I have a bunch of dotfiles (you probably do too). On some machines / servers I use bash, other times I use zsh. I usually use iTerm2 as an emulator, but sometimes I'm on Windows have to use something else. I usually use Vim, except when I ... you get the point. My habits are fairly consistent, but there's always exceptions. I wanted a simple solution that allowed me to easily manage my dotfiles between machines, regardless of my setup. This appears to be a very common problem with a number of excellent solutions (see GNU Stow and many many others) -- I'm sure there are plenty of improvements on mine.

## The Solution

Git is a pretty obvious choice for version control of dotfiles, and GitHub to easily store them on a remote server. I could clone them locally directly to `$HOME`, but having a git repository in your top level directory is pretty annoying.

Let's do automatic symlinks using a Makefile instead. I could manually set the symlinks myself, but that's annoying. I'm essentially using Make as a way to hold a collection of shell scripts -- this could be done almost as easily using a simple `make.sh` file. However, Make is ubiquitous and has some benefits (as we'll see).

At a high level, the goal is to be able to run `make` and have all my symlinks automatically set up (along with anything else that's convenient when setting up dotfiles). This is basically the equivalent of manually running:

```shell
~/dotfiles $ ln -s ~/dotfiles/vimrc ~/.vimrc
~/dotfiles $ ln -s ~/dotfiles/bashrc ~/.bashrc
# etc etc
```

One note about `ln`: running
```shell
~/dotfiles $ ln -s ./vimrc ~/.vimrc
```

(note the relative path) will **not** work. For a symlink to be created, absolute paths must be used (`~` is allowable).

Here's how I did that using Make:
- Create a list of files I want to symlink
- Use that list as a Makefile target
- For that target, run the appropriate `ln` command.

This is fairly straightforward, with a few speedbumps that I'll go through. First up, the actual Makefile:

```shell
SHELL := /bin/bash
EXCLUDED_FILES := Makefile README.md
DOTFILES := $(filter-out $(EXCLUDED_FILES), $(wildcard *))
MAKEFILE_PATH := $(shell dirname $(realpath $(lastword $(MAKEFILE_LIST))))

dots: $(DOTFILES)

$(DOTFILES): # for each dotfile, symlink it to the home directory
    @ln -svfn $(MAKEFILE_PATH)/$@ ~/.$@

.PHONY: dots $(DOTFILES) clean
```

*Note: this is really quite simple, there's not much going on here. This honestly might not even be worth a post, but for the amount of iterations of dotfile management I've gone through, and how simple and effective this is, I figured I'd share it.*

`DOTFILES` is that list of files I mentioned -- it's just every file in the current directory except the Makefile itself, and my README. Obviously, I don't want to symlink my Makefile or README to my home directory.

The target / dependency link is a bit tricky if you're not familiar with Make -- when you run `make dots` (or just `make`, as `dots` is the default target), Make will evaluate the dependencies of `dots`, which in this case is the list of dotfiles. So, `dots: $(DOTFILES)` is the same as `dots: gitconfig vimrc bashrc [...etc]`

For each file in the makefile list, it then runs the `@ln` command. Prefixing commands with `@` in Makefiles prevents the command itself from being printed -- instead, I'm using the `-v` flag to verbosely print what's going on.

`$@` is the argument -- in this case, it's each of the items in the dotfiles list, one at a time. This uses Make's built in functionality instead of writing a `for file in files` loop. I wanted to lean as heavily as possible on Git and Make here, instead of reinventing the wheel a bunch of times.

### .PHONY

A quick note about `.PHONY` and the purpose of Make -- Make is a build automation tool, and I'm abusing it a bit here. It has a lot of features for big (often C/C++) software projects (example: checking if source files have changed and therefore must be recompiled), and I'm using it essentially as a collection of shell commands. The `$(DOTFILES)` target is a bit weird, because *all of those files already exist*, which is kind of the opposite of what Make expects. As such, I'm adding everything to `.PHONY`, which prevents Make from actually checking if files exist -- it just runs the command every time blindly.

Okay, so we've created a simple way to symlink a bunch of stuff to my home directory, and saved it in a Makefile so I never have to remember any of the commands. What else is valuable?

### make clean

It'd be nice to be able to easily remove all the symlinks (or delete existing files before adding the symlinks), so let's add that:

```shell
clean: # interactively remove all dotfiles in the home directory
    @rm -i $(addprefix ~/., $(DOTFILES))
```

`addprefix` is another Makefile helper, it'll add `~/.` to the beginning of every item in the `$(DOTFILES)` list.


### Machine Specific Functionality

The last feature I wanted was a `machine_specific` file -- a place to put any arbitrary PATH setting or anything else I didn't want to commit. I wanted the file stub to be saved in version control so it's present when I clone it, but not to have any changes tracked by git. After some googling, here's what I came up with:

```
dots: $(DOTFILES)
    git update-index --skip-worktree machine_specific # ignore changes forever
```

Now when I run `make dots`, Make will first run all the dependencies (in this case, creating a bunch of symlinks), and then run `git update-index --skip-worktree machine_specific`, which will forever ignore changes I make to the `machine_specific` file. Both `bashrc` and `zshrc` source this file, so I can add anything I want to it and be confident that

1. It'll always be sourced when I need it
2. Changes will never get pushed to GitHub

The obvious issue is that as I add snippets to `machine_specific`, there's the potential to lose code if a machine goes down. However, my solution to that is "don't ever add stuff to `machine_specific` that you wouldn't be okay with losing tomorrow".

***

That's about it! This solution covers my needs nicely, while staying very simple and lightweight.

1. Easily deployable to a new machine, no dependencies besides Make
2. Automatically symlinks dotfiles with one command
3. A `machine_specific` file that's nicely handled by Git, so I can make sure my PATH is right on each system
4. No long winded brittle shell scripts
